High in this video we're going to look at mathematical operations on decimals.
Now some arithmetic operators don't work the same with decimals as they do with floats and integers.
In particular I want to point out that the different model operators behave differently.
And of course they do not function well as well since it just returns a total consisting of the mod
results.
So the different mod operators so satisfy the usual equation which I'm sure you never thought you'd
see again but here it is nonetheless.
So this equation that relates the div and mod operators still holds with decimals.
That hasn't changed that's still there but for integers the div operator performs floored division in
other words a div B is the floor of a divided by B for decimals.
However it performs truncated division which means that a div B is the truncation of a divided by B.
Now for positive matters for positive numbers that doesn't matter.
But for negative numbers it does.
So again those pesky negative numbers are creating problems.
Let's take a look.
If we just do regular integers tender of three we get three.
And if we do Decimal the decimal three we get decimal 3.
So that still works the same way.
You'll notice by the way that we don't have to change the operator that div operator is basically polymorphic.
It's you know like many things in Python it figures out that hey I'm working with decimal numbers.
It's going to go and look for an implementation of this do method in the decimal class and use that
if it finds it.
Now if we look at negative 10 of 3 when we're working with integers we get negative 4 which is the flawed
division of negative 10 divided by 3 but for decimals The result is negative 3 because it's the truncated
division.
So it's just something to keep in mind.
It doesn't work the same way.
Now why doesn't it work the same way.
What was the reason behind this.
Well it really boils down to how this integer division was defined in the decimal class.
So let's take a look at how it's actually done and we have a divided by B that say the top row is called
the dividend bottom is called the divisor So the algorithm works this way.
It first figures out the sign of the result right.
Is it going to be a positive result or a negative result.
Then it uses the absolute values for both the divisor and the dividend.
So basically it's trips of any negative signs.
Then it keeps subtracting B from A.
As long as a is greater than or equal to be once it's not.
It then looks at the number of times the subtraction was performed and it returns that with the sign
that was calculated initially.
So let's take a look at an example.
It's actually really quite simple and very elegant in how it actually performs integer division.
So if we have 10 divided by three while the result is going to be positive.
So we kind of put that aside and then we strip away any negative signs.
There aren't any but we would in any case and now we start doing this subtraction.
So 10 minus three is seven.
Seven is still greater than equal to three.
So we do this again.
Seven minus three is now four.
Four is greater than equal to three.
Now we do it again.
Four minus three is one.
Now one is less than three.
So now we stop.
So we did this operation three times and the sign was positive.
So we return 3.
Now if we have negative 10 or 3 Well the first thing we do is we'll look at the result.
The result is negative.
Now we go ahead and we strip out any negative signs.
So now we're left with 10 over 3.
So basically it's the same calculation we did before we did 10 minus three or seven.
Seven minus three.
Four right.
Four minus three is one we stop.
Now we've done this calculation three times and the result is supposed to be negative.
So we return negative 3.
So that's that's how it's done.
And basically it's the same as truncating the real division
by the truncation of 10 divided by 3 is 3 and the truncation of negative 10 divided by three is also
negative 3.
But this equation here once more is still satisfied.
I just want to point that out that's very important the relationship between the different mod operators
has not changed.
But of course since the way that the device performed for decimals that means that the mod is going
to be different depending on whether and are integers and the decimals.
So let's take a look at an example of that.
And again this really matters when we have a negative number.
So let's say that any equals negative 135 and D is for right for the numerator and denominator so minus
135 for using integers is negative 34 but using decimals it's negative 33 not calculate the mod negative
135 not for this one but when we use decimals it's negative 3.
So very different results but this result is still satisfied if we calculate it for the integer four
times negative thirty four plus one.
That gives us negative 135 which is our original numerator and if we do it for decimals we have four
times negative 33 plus negative 3 which is still negative 135.
Now what about other mathematical operations.
Well the decimal class actually defines a bunch of various mathematical operations like square root
different logs base 10 base e or arbitrary bases and so on.
But you know if you look at the functions that are defined in the math model you won't find all of them
in the decimal class some of them are not there.
For example the trick and metric functions aren't defined in the decimal class.
Usually for finance and banking it probably doesn't matter that much.
Now we can use the math model right so you can still apply functions from the math module to decimals.
But keep in mind that what will happen is that it's going to take the DSM or cast it as a float and
then perform the operation.
So if you were to use the square root function then if you were to use the square root function in the
math model it's really going to take the square root of the floating representation of that decimal
number as opposed to taking the square root that's defined in the decimal class which will then use
decimal numbers to perform that operation.
Now so you can use the math module but you kind of lose the whole precision mechanism that was the reason
for using decimals in the first place.
So typically if you're going to do math operations on decimal numbers you going avoid the math model
unless you really have to because you don't have a decimal equivalent.
So let's take a look at an example of why it matters.
So let's say that we set up precision context precision to 28 and let's take a look at X equal to zero
point zero 1.
So this X is a float and then we look at the equivalent decimal as decimal 0 1 0 1 missing a closing
quote there.
So let's take the route using the math module.
So math that square root of x and then we'll look at a mixed version where we take the square root from
the math module but we apply it to the decimal version of X and then finally we'll take a look at the
square root using the decimal classes.
Square root function and we call it this way we have the number the object.
And then we call the square root method.
So if we print the root which is the float version we get those values here.
As expected it's not exact.
If we use the mixed method if we look at what happens with the mixed method Well we get the same result
because what happened basically is that it converted the decimal 0.01 to its float equivalent which
is an approximation and then took the square root.
On the other hand with the root decimal which was using the decimal implementation of the square root
we get exactly zero point 1.
And of course if we now take the numbers and multiply them of each other we should get back our original
number.
Well the floats we don't write we get something that's close to it but not exactly the same.
Because while we were already just on the square with itself and the same thing here with the mixed
method because things did get converted to floats so we have the same result.
However look at the decimal version we get exactly 0 1 0 0 1 back.
So it's a more precise calculation and a more precise representation.
So next we'll look at the code and we'll do that in the next video.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you in a bit.